good afternoon welcome to session 303 so
on Monday you saw intro to Xcode
yesterday you saw a little bit more
detail about it and today we're going to
get into a lot more detail so I hope you
ready
so I'm Andres portal rude and I like to
talk about some of the details of Xcode
what we're going to talk about today
some of the things we'll cover are
moving to Xcode some of you may have
source code so we're going to have old
project builder projects you may have
code where your projects you may want to
move that into Xcode we're going to talk
about optimizing build performance as
you know the speed is a big theme of the
Xcode discussion Xcode talks from this
this conference and we're going to be
going into some of that we're going to
talk about Xcode support for building
for multiple OS versions from one in the
same install and also get into some
issues of workflow and automation we
have several features for accessing
documentation for doing source code
management for automating your workflow
in many ways and the common theme among
all of these things is time right this
is all to save you time so that you can
focus on your app and fixing your bugs
and then shipping your product so moving
into Xcode there are some ways
and it's easy to get started many of you
have probably already installed the
Developer Preview for Panther and maybe
played with Xcode maybe installed it on
Jaguar
there are many migration paths if you
already have code one of them is to
create a new project using the new
project wizard of the appropriate type
application framework whatever your
product is and then just add the source
code that you have to the project
another way is to open an old project
builder project Xcode can seamlessly
open project builder projects and build
your targets whatever you had in the
project builder project of course you
can't make modifications that rely on
Xcode only features and then go back to
project builder so but you can upgrade
also we have a code warrior importer
project builder had this as well but in
Xcode it's been improved a lot so we can
bring in your source files we convert
your targets and set a lot of the
compiler options as well and finally a
fourth way is if you have a make file
you can actually wrap an Xcode project
around that you just set up a target to
invoke your make file and you can still
take advantage of the editor you take
advantage of a lot of the features in
Xcode but you would let you make file or
ant or jam or whatever you're using
actually do the build so another
important point is that if you bring in
source code let's say you bring in an
old project builder project you can
actually convert each target
individually and we'll see how to do
that but you you can leave the targets
that work best as Jam targets for now
you can take one target after another
and convert them and then gradually
start taking advantage of Xcode features
and an important point is that some of
the features for showing such as zero
Lang can fix and continue are really
only available for Xcode targets we
really rely on this new native internal
build system to deal with this so you
need to upgrade your targets convert
your targets to take advantage of that
and if you create a new project or if
you start with the samples the new
project templates are native targets by
default so let's talk a little bit about
some of the target types that that Xcode
supports so first of all of course the
native Xcode targets we talked about we
support applications frameworks
libraries plugins in the developer
preview and we'll be extending this to
all the different kinds of things you
want to build the kernel extensions etc
the project builder targets you would
still leave it as a project builder
target if it's one of the few things we
don't support yet which are the kernel
extensions some of the Java types and of
course you could leave your applications
and frameworks as the old project
builder targets as well but then you
wouldn't take advantage of the new
features so you'd want to upgrade and
it's important to note we actually
support external targets as well so you
could have any external build system you
want in fact it might not even be a
build system at all maybe it's just a
shell script you want to invoke is
part of your build and it fits
seamlessly into Xcode so you can have a
native application target that depends
on some custom shell script that you
have another important aspect of an
Xcode project are the build settings so
the targets define what you want to
build and the settings are the little
knobs and switches on that it defines
how you want it built so they control
the inner workings of a build do you
want debug symbols or not you want
optimization or not where do you want
the output file to go that kind of thing
they're usually set on a particular
target you've probably seen this in some
of the earlier demos we're gonna get
into more detail about that in a demo in
this session and you can also though set
them on a build style we call it build
style so you can for example set up a
build style for debug and another one
for release you only need to have a
single target for whatever you're
building it's a it's an application but
you can apply the different styles to
build different variations so the Styles
encode the the things that are different
between a debug and a release builds
such as optimization level debug symbols
those kinds of things and the settings
and the build styles do override the
ones at a lower level we'll see a
diagram here of how this fits together
but the basic point is if you have a
build style that says it turns on
optimization then that's going to
override what your target says they're
also passed in the environment for
external shell scripts and for external
tools and this means that you can set
options in your project and have those
be passed down to whatever a build
system or tool that you're using whether
it's make whether it's a custom perl
script perl script things like that so
how do these fit together well as I
mentioned there's there's an ordering of
them and this is just kind of give you a
flavor for some of the some of the depth
here of what you can set up the
environment variables such as path and
user and those kinds of UNIX II things
are available at the lowest level just
like for make above that there are
built-in settings these are the defaults
things like where the default system
locations for frameworks go the default
optimization level for a compiler that
kind of thing the target settings are
above that this is what you see in the
inspector as we'll see in a demo in a
little bit and the build Styles override
that so this is where you would say turn
on or off debug symbols for a particular
for a particular build the command line
settings go above this these are not
used in the IDE but as you may know and
as we'll see later there is a external
command line tool that lets you build
Xcode projects as part of a nightly
build there's part of a part of an
automated process so if you pass
anything on the command line just like
would make it will override whatever
your project said so build styles what
are they what are they use for Willie
it's important to note that they
dynamically override the target settings
they don't actually go and modify the
target so this is this is something that
you pick in a pop-up menu or you can
choose it as the active build style and
it's it's just to avoid having to
duplicate targets because then you get
into a situation where when you add a
file you're gonna have to remember to
add it to both your debug and release
target etc some examples of this are you
know the obvious ones turn debug symbols
on or off but also you may want to
enable or disable zero link zero link is
a feature that saves you a lot of time
but it also defers some potential link
errors to the actual runtime so if you
know a zero link works it actually works
by doing the linking as you load in each
object file you actually run the object
files and when that happens if you have
an undefined symbol you may not find out
it until later but so you may want to
turn that off just to validate a build
and then turn it back on to get the
speed benefit again other things you can
do are to enable or disable alter
alternate algorithms or if you have a
demo version of your app you may want to
build a demo version with a save
disabled and then you build the full
version also without having to add two
separate targets one of the new features
in Xcode compared to the the older IDs
there Apple has had are user
configurable build rules in a in a
graphical way so you can actually define
how the build system Maps particular
file types to compilers in a very detail
way and
the way this works is that there is a
list of rules as we'll see a little bit
and a little bit later and the first one
that matches is the one that gets
applied so you can define both specific
and general rules and have the specific
ones first and then in that way you can
control very into a very fine-grained
level how you source files get processed
in each rule can match two to two
different things it can either be a
category of file types so extra code has
a built in notion of various file types
Java source files C++ files res files
and M files let's say but you can also
match any particular shell pattern start
at HC in this case matches anything with
an extension of H or C you can enter
anything you want there and in Xcode you
also use the rules to select the
compiler version so it's pretty easy to
just go in and find the entries for the
C files you can pick between GCC 3-3 or
GCC 3-1 let's say so now you've moved
you project into Xcode whether it's from
project builder or by adding sources
that you had separately let's talk a
little bit optimistic or Minh
now Xcode does have a fast powerful
build system and it provides a lot of
the speed benefits automatically so
there's no dependency on external builds
we don't generate some text file that
then escaparse by an external tool
instead Xcode just keeps track of the
text changes that you make and use
source code or whether you add files to
your project and it automatically knows
what you need to rebuild so by the time
you go to actually start a build it's
already done a lot of the work it's
tightly integrated with the user
interface so you see checkmarks for
files that are out of date etc however
there are still opportunities for you to
tune your project Xcode will
automatically do things like predictive
compilation but you can also set up a
precompiled prefix header for your
project that can save a lot of time
that's something that Xcode doesn't
really do for you because it depends on
how your sources are laid out you'll
wanted to find that yourself you can
also turn on
parallel distributed builds parallel
builds are on by default by distributed
builds we want to you can access that an
easy way but you need to enable that
because we don't want to start sending
your source code everywhere just without
you knowing it zero link is something
that is also enabled by default of
course you don't want that on for
deployments so there's fine grained
control over that and the same for
fixing continue so a word about
precompiled headers as you may have
heard in previous talks GCC 3-3 has a
new precompiled header mechanism called
PCH and this is a lot better than the
older ones because it supports c++ first
and foremost and it's also a better
implementation these are easy to setup
using Xcode target inspector what you do
is you define a prefix header for the
common API a lot of Carbon applications
for example we'd start by including the
carbon carbon dodge header
similarly cocoa apps may start by
including cocoa H so if you put this in
a prefix header recompile the prefix
header you can get really fast
turnaround keep in mind the prefix
header gets included for all files in
the target so if you have C++ and C
files it needs to be compatible with
both this is easy to do with the pound
if def we'll see that in the demo and
also keep in mind to only put headers
that change relatively infrequently into
the PCH because of course if they change
then the precompiled header will need to
be recompiled
now Xcode knows about all the
dependencies and the inclusions so it
will automatically recompile it with a
prefix setter for you but that still
takes extra time so you wouldn't want to
put anything in there the changes a lot
distributive builds is another new
feature that we're really excited about
Xcode can take advantage of multiple
processors in your machine of course but
you know your neighbor has in the
cubicle next to you as that g5 sitting
there and he's surfing the web and yeah
you really want to compile on that
machine actually so what you can do is
you can take advantage of in effect and
and instead of a two processor system
you can have an end processor system
right where n is the sum of
all the CPUs and all the different
machines that you choose for distributed
builds so it can be distributed to other
machines and there's two modes there's
what we call in sort of the free love
mode which is where it uses rendezvous
to just see oh is there anybody out
there who said that they want to be a
distributed build server and if so okay
well we'll send them our files right but
for a more controlled environment you
may want to specify a list of servers
for example the ones that are known to
be you know in your team's department in
a lab somewhere or something and a note
about this is it does require GCC 3.3
and Xcode targets so here's another
reason to upgrade to upgrade an imported
project builder target to be an Xcode
target zero link is another feature
designed to save you time
we found the link time is a significant
part of the turnaround time and not so
much for a full build but when you do
the Edit debug build cycle you spend a
lot of time watching it's a linking this
and that so zero link takes advantage of
the fact that typically when you make
edits you edit let's say you have a
hundred files you added a couple of them
and then you want to link again well
then it has to read all those files back
and generate the binary etc so what we'd
rather do is just leave those other 98
files alone just load them off of the
disk when the application starts running
so again it eliminates the link step by
running directly and this is on by
default and the deploy in in the
development build style so while you're
doing day-to-day development you get
zero link by default for for a native
target the deployment build of course
you get a real binary because you don't
want to actually ship your object files
with fixing continue this is another
feature that's mostly automatic it lets
you fix things while you're debugging
and as we've seen in some of the
previous demos you don't even have to
stop at a breakpoint and for simple
logic errors this can be a real
time-saver
it's enabled by default you can turn
this one off too if you want there's no
real reason to turn it off but we want
to give you lots of control over these
things and with that nifty search field
now in the inspector there's no real
reason not to
this is great for localized changes you
don't want to change things that have
global effect like the size of the
struct but logic errors off-by-one
errors that kind of thing works great so
I'm gonna have Scott took her to come up
on stage and demo some of these things
what I'm going to go through today is
we've already gone through this in
previous sessions but we want to take
another pass through the target settings
and give you kind of a deeper feel for
how to set up your target both just the
settings you want to set and also some
tips and tricks for the precompiled
headers how to set that up properly
we'll also look a little bit at the
build styles and how and at build
feedback a little bit more in depth on
that so let me bring up my project so
the first thing I want to do is just
point out that the way it works is that
we just bring up the inspector on the
target and therefore there are four
parts to this inspector there's this
general tab where you have your name of
the target and the product and notice
the name of your target can be different
than the product and also the target
dependencies this target doesn't have
any at this point there's the build tab
which I'll get back to later in just a
bit and this is kind of a meet this is
where all the settings go there's also
the rules that was talked about earlier
this is where you can set for a given
type of file you know what do you want
to use and as point out you can also
create your own and you can reorder them
how you like and then finally there's
the properties so for those applications
that are for those targets that produce
bundles like applications and frameworks
here's where you can set stuff that
would normally go in your info.plist
like your bundle identifier an icon or
document types in the case of an
application and I just note that we also
do support for example opening up the
info.plist as a file so you can directly
edit it but let me jump back here to
build and as I said this is the meat of
the target inspector this is where all
your settings are so you'll notice here
we're looking at the common settings
these are settings we expect you to
change often there are things like okay
I want to enable C++ exceptions or I
want maybe I have a style of library or
my header search paths but there's much
more than this
just open this up we actually have
several groups here many are static but
there's actually one dynamic group that
I'll get to in a second so you'll notice
here we have kind of our standard build
settings these are settings that aren't
bound to a given compiler like GCC or a
tool like res they may apply to multiple
tools or they may just be something
that's specific to Xcode itself we also
have GCC settings and we have some
resource manager settings and then for
these groups we also provide some
subdivisions and as you can see we also
show the subdivisions in some cases by
different icons next to the warnings I'm
next to the settings to talk let's talk
a little bit more about the actual UI
itself so let me go back to the common
settings and you'll notice here what we
provide if I if I select one of these
guides we actually provide descriptions
because one thing we noticed when we
looked at environments is that
especially when dealing with things like
GCC but also other environments
sometimes the settings could be very
cryptic and you as a developer may not
understand Oh or really need to know
what all these know what all these
things mean and so we wanted to provide
descriptions to make it easy for you to
get a little bit of background on okay
if I check this on what is it going to
do to my code also as you can see
especially with if I go to for example
the GCC settings there are quite a
number of them and so we wanted to
provide a quick way that you could get
to the gist the settings you want even
if you didn't know exactly what it was
called so for example if I want to find
out about let's say prefix files I can
say prefix now it's interesting you'll
notice here okay well this has prefixed
this has prefix but effective C++
violations what's going on there well if
I click on it and if you go through here
what you'll find out is it's actually
referencing the prefix in the
description so this isn't the best
example but another example is for
example if I wanted to do something with
type ID which has to do with our TTI it
actually picks it up right here so this
way you don't have to know what exactly
what it's called you just have to kind
of know what you're looking for so we
hope that this will make it a lot e we
believe this will make it a lot easier
for people when they need to set those
types of target settings
the one last thing I want to talk about
was this current settings you'll notice
that it has the same kind of icon as
some of our smart groups over here have
because it's actually a smart group what
the current settings contains is all
those settings that you've set on your
target that are different from the
defaults so it's kind of like it's a
very convenient filter because if you
went to go back look at common settings
or the GCC settings you'd see a bunch of
things but some of these may be things
you've never touched and never want to
touch these are the actual settings that
you have changed from the default so it
gives you a quick look to see you okay
what's different about my target from
what a default stock target would give
me so at this point I'm going to close
this and I want to talk a little bit
about build styles which was talked
about earlier one of the problems were
trying to solve with build styles is
that you want to be able to just
override one thing in your target and
we've seen some environments where
you'll have to have like you know three
different version three different
targets that all build the same exact
thing except maybe they have a different
optimization style so what we've what
we've implemented are these build styles
and we have two by default in every
project one is the development style and
one is the deployment style and so you
can see here it's the same UI is the
target editor and I'm not going to go to
that but one small thing I wanted to
mention was sometimes you want to add
your own custom flag build settings for
whatever reason you may need to
reference them in a script for example
and this is very easily done by just
clicking this little plus button I can
just type you know my my build setting
and then you can put in the value
and just as easily if you want to get
rid of something you just go down here
and hit the minus button it goes away
and then one final thing is in this
project inspector where we have the
build styles we also allow you to
indicate for a given project you may
want to build it into a separate
location like we're doing here this
provides some cleanliness but also it
can leverage our build system if you all
if you build a lot of projects into a
common location we can actually do some
stuff to use those things together
so let me close that so now let's talk
with just oh just a second about the
prefix file so it was mentioned earlier
you can create these you know
precompiled prefix header files well the
way this works is if I go to the build
let me search for prefix we have two
settings one is the prefix header and
you'll notice here it's QT underscore
prefix I'd aging we just check on the
pre-compiled prefix header and to show
you what a common prefix header looks
like let's go over here and this is my
QT prefix page and you'll notice this is
fairly simple remember that because your
prefix is implicitly included before
every file you do need to be careful
because for example these are all C++
files that are being had these are all
headers with C++ that are being
implemented but if I always to include
this say from a C file I don't want
these headers to be implicitly included
because it could cause problems so
remember to use these guards here this
if dev C++ FFC but it does provide a lot
of flexibility because you can then have
different sets of headers that get
included for different types of files
now finally let's go ahead I'm gonna
build and run this to just give a little
bit of talk a little bit about our build
feedback well yeah well one our single
file builds are really fast too you saw
there for just a second it said the bill
failed well one thing I can do is we
have this detailed build window where I
can go and I can say oh look I have I
had errors while compiling this file
here I have two warnings and I have a
series of errors and that's one place
that can go but there's actually places
that are even more more common you can
look at we actually have this errors and
warnings smart group that if I click it
pops up with a window that at the top
has a list of all the errors and
warnings and then even just with a
keyboard I can go through this list and
it'll jump me around to the various
errors and warnings and if I want this
in a separate window all I need to do is
double click the errors and warnings and
there you go there's a separate window I
can just track it over there and then
finally in a given file let me go to for
example this warning right here
this one right here you'll notice right
here we have the warnings and the errors
in line and if you actually click on
them will show you in the status bar
okay this is what the warning said so in
this case they're relatively easy to fix
choose turns out I forgot SMI call it in
I'm just labeled something and then you
can just go on your way back to Andres
okay
thanks Scott alright so that was just
showing you where to actually set these
some of these flags that we talked about
in the slides earlier so I'm going to
switch gears a little bit talk about
billing for multiple OS releases so you
now have the nice Panther preview CD in
your bag well you also have the shipping
Jaguar OS and you may want to deploy for
10.1 also so xcode lets you build for
multiple OS releases but still be booted
off for the same of one release this
also saves you time of course because
you don't have to set up multiple
partitions and install on multiple
platforms or at multiple partitions and
then rerun so a typical example is you
might want to run the jaguar version of
Xcode but then you actually use the
Panther api's Panther preview bays each
target can individually specify the
minimum and the maximum OS and the
minimum version of the OS is the minimum
that you require your customers to have
to run it so features on that version
will be assumed to be available now the
maximum version specifies the version
for which you want to take advantage of
features so let's say your minimum is
Jaguar your maximum is Panther you want
to be able to take advantage of Panther
features but you want to do so in a
fail-safe way so if the feature is not
available you just don't call it so and
the Xcode developer preview supports ten
one five it has SDKs 4 10 1 5 10 to 6
and for the Panther preview and this is
the developer CD for both Jaguar and
tachyon Jaguar and
the api's for each OS release are
packaged in an SDK so what is one of
these SDKs contained well it's a folder
that just has the headers and stubb
libraries for that version of the OS so
you actually get the same headers as you
would on a install with developer
packages SDKs can be added independently
and removed independently they can be
rather large since they contain all the
headers and the sub libraries for a
particular version so you can add them
after the fact or you can remove them if
you'd if you decide you don't need for
example 10.1 and one of the things that
happens when you set the minimum and
maximum OS version you want to target is
that special macros are set these are
documented in more detail in the help
pages but you can then use the macros in
your code to check which which version
which functions are available which
functionality you can use them at
runtime to check whether a particular
function pointer is nil and then just
not call that so this is this way you
can take advantage of new features and
still support older releases another
thing Xcode has is what's called source
tree support you may have external
sources such as power plant or the Qt
frameworks or others bit large source
bases that are not part of your project
but they're installed someplace on your
machine that someplace may be different
for each developer so what each
developer can do is to set up just a
single source tree to point to a place
on disk and say ok here's where my QT
sources live here's where my power plant
sources live and then the project can
just reference that and an access them
that way
the source tree can refer to the source
base using either relative or absolute
paths so you can nest projects inside of
folders that group the source trees and
the projects or you could put this the
the source base an absolute place on
disk this feature is used by the code
warrior importer when it when it imports
a project that uses for example power
plant it will actually find power plant
on you
can set up a source street to that so
you don't have to copy the sources in or
carry those along or anything so we
talked a little bit about build and
about how to configure your project to
take advantage of some of the speed
improvements there such as setting up a
prefix setter precompiled prefix setter
we talked a little bit about the OS
support we also have some workflow and
automation features that you might not
be aware of and that you probably
haven't seen in any demos so far so some
of the some of the stuff we've shown so
far has been talked about in previous
sessions but but the second half here
are some some kind of pearls that I
haven't been talked about yet source
code management we managed we've
mentioned a little bit in previous
sessions Xcode is tightly integrated
with the SCM support so we have built-in
support for CBS and perforce and it's
not just a menu that you pull down on
you and you can access all the features
there we actually show the information
about the SCM state in line along with
the files it's a lot more integrated and
we support the day-to-day operations
such as adding removing files changing
files updating files that kind of stuff
you can also compare you can look at the
history you can open the inspector on a
particular file and you can see the
source code management history you can
see who checked in who checked in what
changes and when and you can actually
select two revisions and compare them
graphically in a tool called file merge
some of the other things we leave to
external repository management systems
are creating a new repository and things
like that we also have very good
documentation access that's also part of
productivity and speed right is getting
quick access to your documentation and
you know you look at this function with
five arguments and you need the details
of that really quickly we have API
lookup which searches as you type you've
seen in previous demos and they'll
probably see you soon again maybe how we
can quickly narrow down a large list of
symbols of documentation pages for the
api's macros ten as you know has a very
rich set of api's in fact there are
multiple sets of api's cocoa
etc so you can focus on any one of those
or more than one where you could search
through them all and and look quickly
look for what you want to find the
full-text search is better for things
like the the conceptual documentation
where you may have a phrase or concept
in mind and you may just try out a
couple of phrases until you get the hits
that you want so what's available in
this area first of all there's help for
Xcode itself right that's available from
the help menu as we'll show in a minute
in a minute we also have access to the
full documentation for carbon cocoa ioki
etc all the reference documentation if
you need information about a specific
method or function or class it's it's
just a couple of mouse clicks away Suns
Java documentation is also available the
Mac OS 10 man pages are available we're
based on BSD and all those main pages
are available right there in Xcode
another another aspect is scripting and
automation so the X is the documentation
and you can certainly do that through
let's say man on the command line you
could do that through the built in the
documentation support you can also use
scripts to set up custom queries or that
kind of thing
there are several levels of automation
here X code itself is scriptable project
builder was not that was the the
previous IDE
Xcode is actually scriptable from from
the ground up there is a command-line
build tool also so that you can use that
and your nightly builds let's say if you
have batch build that occurs every night
that pulls 15 projects together and
builds them with special options you
could do that the command-line build
tool is actually linked against the same
framework that the Xcode IDE uses so it
has exactly the same code paths for
building and all that has access to the
entire build system there is a user
scripts menu which is this was an MP W
feature that was requested and it's been
added you can add custom menu items tied
to your own scripts and we also have npw
inspired worksheet functionality so
we'll talk a little bit more about these
the script ability as I mentioned before
you can actually have
says to xcode's object model through
AppleScript you can change target
settings and multiple targets add files
to targets add to projects those kinds
of things you can also start and stop
builds using Apple script if you want
there is still I should say there is
still a couple of things that are not
supported some of the details for
example not every property of every
object but we're working on adding that
because we want Apple script script
ability to be a very full-featured way
of accessing xcode functionality another
way to automate things is to build from
the command line alright so you may have
a build that starts at 2 a.m. at night
there's a tool called PB build this is
kind of for historical reasons to
provide compatibility with some scripts
it's it provides access to the IDE and
as I mentioned it uses the exact same
IDE same exact same build system as the
IDE does so you have access to all the
same features you can write shell
scripts for nightly builds mention that
and you can tune in various things and
your PB build invocation so you can
specify which target or targets you want
to build you could specify build styles
let's say you have a full feature then a
demo version and maybe a professional
edition of your app you can build all
three to different locations
just do that iteratively and then that's
the kind of batch processing you can do
let's say overnight you can specify
build styles override extra build
settings etc there's a lot of there's
actually a man page for Pb build and
there's also a documentation the Xcode
Xcode would help about that the script
menu is something this is a feature that
we got a lot of requests for people want
to take a let's say Apple script Perl
scripts whatever just add their own menu
item and attach menu right menu cue
quibble into that and then use that so
we have that it's completely user
configurable it's defined by construct
by adding scripts to a particular
location to folder and you just the name
of the script is the name that shows up
in the menu item there's also a command
line tool that adds new menu items to X
similar to how it worked npw it can
actually contain any kind of script of
course an Apple script but also shell
script Perl or Python or anything else
that you can invoke from the command
line as a script you can actually create
an Xcode menu item for and attach a menu
key equivalent and use it and one
important feature here is that all the
scripts have access to the text buffers
so very often what people do is they
will write a script to take some chunk
of text manipulate it in a certain way
and then paste it back into the text
buffer all with one command stroke this
ties in a little bit to the worksheet
functionality we have this is another
npw inspired feature as Ted mentioned in
the overview for developer tools there's
a great legacy of developer tools here
we want to make sure we brought forward
some of the pearls that people have
really liked in the previous IDE s so
xcode has npw style worksheet
functionality and what this means is you
have a text file you can select one or
more commands and just execute them as
if they were as if you typed them in a
terminal like shell and one of the nice
ways to use this is that you can save
frequently used snippets of shell code
or even Perl code or Apple script just
in a text file and then run it whenever
you need to it also is nice because
unlike terminal it preserves the history
independently so you can come back to a
command and its output that you ran
maybe half a year ago right and you can
see what the output was you can you can
compare things that way we'll see some
of this in the demo and again the
results here are pasted back into the
text buffer so it's an iterative
worksheet to experience so to help demo
some of these features I'm going to ask
Matt Morse to come up on stage
well as unders has pointed out there's a
wealth of documentation on the system
there are over 500 books of various
scope from small topics all the way up
to the human interface guidelines and
besides that there's over 75,000 bits of
reference documentation for the api's
that are available in the libraries on
your system so this is a great wealth of
documentation the challenge is to get to
the piece of documentation that you need
quickly so I'd like to show you some of
the ways you can do that in Xcode Xcode
has a documentation window well first
there's help available through Xcode
health and the documentation window is
available also from the help menu so you
bring up the documentation window it has
a look very much like the project window
with your groups over here in this case
the groups are sections of the
documentation the entire installed
library and subsections that focus on
particular technologies as you see as
I'm selecting the different subsections
the technology home page appears in the
content area and from there you can go
in and find the documentation you want
if you want to browse in that way
navigation note is you can that I think
you should know is you can command click
any link to bring up the separate the
documentation in a separate window and
you can option click to bring it up in
your browser
okay so that's one way to navigate
through the documentation if you're
browsing up here you've seen this area
updating as I was clicking as well this
is the results of a search for the API
symbols that match that are available on
your system so to focus on a particular
symbol just start typing its name and
you quickly go from the entire universe
of 75,000 available symbols down to the
few that match what you're looking at
looking for and in this case let's say
you were looking for the groups method
and clicking that brings it up in the
content area another navigation note is
take a look at the symbol pop up it's
just like in the code editor you can
easily get around the documentation for
a class using this okay I think I should
mention this was shown in the overview
session as well that you can turn off
any of these columns titles that you
don't find useful and customize it for
your the way you like to get around it
okay so that's the API search mechanism
you can also do a full-text search as
you could in project builder on any of
the sections here that you have selected
in your library so that's the
documentation window but often the
quickest way to the answer you want is
directly from your code editor so let's
take a look at a project
bringing up some source code here
getting down to something interesting
you can if you want to look up the
documentation for a specific symbol a
class method just option click it and if
there are multiple destinations as you
see you get a menu to select from if you
wanted to see the documentation for NS
string just pick that likewise you can
control click to bring up the full text
search feature to search for anything
that you want okay so the code editors
nicely linked to the documentation axis
another way you can get to documentation
is through the class browser if you're
doing object-oriented programming you'll
probably find the class browse are very
useful you can get to the header
documentation or the header declarations
but also the blue books give you access
to the documentation for the selected
class or method of that class so make
use of that another way you can get
around is or another type of
documentation you can access is the man
pages the UNIX manual pages either by
name or searching so for example
for example there it is and the man
pages are all linked hyperlinks so you
can go to related man pages this one I
didn't see a link for okay so that's a
good way to access those are a number of
good ways to access the local
documentation the documentation that's
installed on your system if you want to
extend your search a little further the
user scripts menu that onder's mentioned
can help you there for example select
make a selection in your code editor and
you can then search the developer
website at Apple for that that selection
or
send it out to the internet and do a
google search okay so those are some of
the fast ways to get around the
documentation and find answers to the
questions you have let me take a little
closer look at the user scripts menu
okay user scripts are scripts that
extend the command set of Xcode with
commands that you decide you create
Xcode comes with a number of pre-built
commands and here they are and let me
show you how some of these work very
useful one eye I find is this uncomment
comment selection and you see as it was
pointed out earlier that there's a key
equivalent for it so if you need to take
some piece of your code out of service
you can do it as easily as as that okay
another comment type that I find very
useful is this comment with a prefix
with exclamation points if you need to
come back to something later you can
mark it in that way and with a
consistent prefix you can easily get
back to that sort of comments
okay if you're doing object-oriented
programming you might find that you're
doing a lot of typing creating access or
methods for your instance variables here
- user scripts can help you out
for example let's make an access or
method for that instance variable okay
so I've put the declaration on the
clipboard and now I can just paste it in
and likewise there's a similar command
for pasting in the definition okay
there's sort commands and one last thing
I'd like to show you was the use of
scripts menu is the suite of header dot
commands these commands let you put
structured comments in your headers that
later can be generated into HTML
documentation it's much like Java doc
but it's for C C++ and Objective C so
let's see how that works for example
let's say we want to document this class
it can insert a class template comment
take the class name up there and here's
where you'd write your abstract in
description and here's a method that
will document I don't know exactly what
it does but we can at least put in a
skeletal comment and you see that in
this case the user script is smart
enough to parse the Declaration and pull
out the parameters here okay if we save
that and view header doc for this header
Xcode will invoke the header doc tool
generate the HTML and create some
documentation for our class
[Applause]
so I encourage you to give that a try
okay so that's user scripts the related
feature of worksheets I'd like to show
right now worksheets are kind of a less
formal way of adding commands to Xcode
and as was pointed out it's a good way
to keep a history of commands that you
find useful that are difficult to retype
are easily forgotten so here's just a
simple command hit ctrl R select it hit
ctrl R and it's executed in that text
buffer and that's the output so we just
did a listing unix listing of the root
directory this command is used to invoke
an application in a way to see if it's
doing any redundant drawing and those
command line switches are good to
remember one way to do it is to leave it
in your worksheet so let's see what that
looks like
so I'm invoking TextEdit and with those
special flags that show where the
drawing is happening and this makes it
easy to see if any excess drawing is is
going on thank you
all right this is a command that lets
you know what symbols you're importing
from a particular library in this case
we're going to look at text at it and
see what it's pulling in from the cocoa
library so command R ctrl R and there
you have it and I'd like to show you
just one more as we look through this
list of commands you see some summer and
Perl some are invoking Apple scripts
some were Unix commands here's one that
as a genetic engineer you might want to
use if you've misplaced a patch of DNA
and you need a little bit more so there
you go this are the features of works
worksheets user scripts and
documentation access thank you thanks
Matt alright so as you see this you can
really go to town and customize this and
just pretty much set up any kind of
workflow you want bind it to a key
command so I just want to wrap up some
of the things we talked about we want to
leave you a fairly long Q&A session here
today because this is a fairly detailed
session so some of the things we touched
on or Xcode has a lot of productivity
features right some of them we tried to
make many of them work automatically and
a lot of them worked pretty well
automatically we're still a Developer
Preview so by GM we want to get them to
work a lot better automatically there's
still room for improvement in terms of
your fine-tuning things like fixing
continue we can work on making that even
better other things you really need to
customize like the script ability here
we provide you with a lot of sample
scripts all those scripts under the user
menu come as sample scripts but of
course you can you can add or modify any
of them this header doc
knowledge for example is not built into
Xcode in any way that's just in the
script
so you could really add whatever you
want precompiled headers we talked a
little bit about how to set those up
there's a lot more information in the
help pages
Xcode gives you the power of the
flexibility here to really customize
your workflow the way you want to so I
have to learn more about this well we're
not going to ask you to go out on the
web to read about this right we have
built-in help pages so as we just saw
you can use the documentation search fee
search features not just for the API
documentation but also for help about
Xcode functionality itself there of
course the inside macro is ten books
especially the system overview book that
talks more about some of the concepts
that underlie this the IDE of course
supports the platform initiatives things
like frameworks things like like that
that kind of concept and those IDE
independent things are documented in the
system overview Xcode knows how to build
them but but the great the best
documentation is in the system overview
of course the developer connection tools
pages and the CVS documentation and the
perforce documentation are available on
the web I would contact for more
information guide fuji georgie
technology manager for development tools
I'm actually going to invite him up on
the stage now for Q&A and here also some
other other URLs there are a couple more
sessions you don't want to check out
you